---
layout: post
title: Guessing Wordle from tweets using simple elimination / Wordle grids are really spoiler-y
date: 2022-02-09 21:01:00
description: How Spoiler-y are the Wordle grids
tags: formatting images
categories: sample-posts
---

### Intro

Everyday my Twitter feed is littered with that day's Wordle grids. I often try to play a little game of trying to figure out what the other guesses of the person might be. While the grids are a great way to share your attempt spoiler free, if you try, the grids can inherently convey small clues to the answer. For instance, consider this wordle grid below.

```text
Wordle 235 4/6

⬛⬛⬛🟨⬛
🟨🟨🟨⬛⬛
⬛🟩🟩🟩🟩
🟩🟩🟩🟩🟩
```

From the third row `⬛🟩🟩🟩🟩`, we can infer that the answer is a word for which there exists another word with the same last 4 letters but a different first letter. This means we know that the answer cannot be for instance, `FIRST` or `STORE`, because there are no other words with `_IRST` or `_TORE` which would've satisfied the 3rd guess but can be `HUMOR` as the 3rd guess could have been `TUMOR` or `RUMOR`.

Using just this one tweet, we can eliminate a few possible answers. If we keep applying this method of simple elimination to narrow the possible answers, what is the smallest set of possible answers can we get to.

To emphasise, the goal is not to solve the Wordle using tweets or do it efficiently; neither is it to use any statistical information from the tweets to figure out the answer. The goal is to simply see how 'spoiler-y' the wordle grids are, that is, if I can use these small hints from the different rows like `⬛🟩🟩🟩🟩` to arrive at the smallest set of possible answers. (Spoiler: this set is generally of size 1 i.e. the answer).

### Method

I used the Wordle tweets collected [here](https://www.kaggle.com/benhamner/wordle-tweets). An important primary thing is that we cannot assume any 'smartness' for any of the grids. Say we see a grid like this
```
⬛⬛⬛🟨⬛
🟨🟩🟨⬛⬛
⬛🟩🟩🟩🟩
⬛🟩🟩🟩🟩
🟩🟩🟩🟩🟩
``` 
If I'm playing optimally, after my first guess to get `⬛⬛⬛🟨⬛` I would try not use any of the characters in black for the next word. However we cannot assume this to hold true for tweets in general. Similarly two rows of `⬛🟩🟩🟩🟩` in one game would be helpful in narrowing down the answer which has two other words sharing the last four characters. The answer can `HUMOR` with the being 3rd and 4th guesses `RUMOR` and `TUMOR`, but not `FLOSS` as `GLOSS` is the only other word satisfying `⬛🟩🟩🟩🟩`. However, we cannot use any of this information as it cannot be applied it generally and I cannot assume someone just didn't enter `GLOSS` twice. Such an assumption could eliminate the actual answer.

Therefore, I create a set of all the unique rows in all the tweets. Since, there can be a maximum of only `3^5 = 243` different unique rows, we just have a set of <243 distinct rows to work with (typically we get ~90-160 unique rows from the tweets). This strips away all the context of the games and each row is present just once because we cannot gain addtional anything from the context to narrow down the answer set.
In Wordle's website source, there's a list of 2315 answers of common English words and 10657 other valid guesses to make up a total of 12972 words. A really large portion of the 12000+ words are obscure words but I do not eliminate them. Thus for my purposes any of the 12000+ words could have been the answer.

Using all the unique rows in the day's tweets, I consider each row and we know that someone made a valid guess `G` for that days answer `A`. Now I simply check that for which words, if they were the days answer, no valid guess `G` could have been made to get the row. For instance, consider the row `🟨🟩🟨⬛⬛` above. We can figure out that `A = THOSE` could be an answer as the guesses `G = SHEAR, SHELF` will give the row. Similarly `A=GREAT` could be an answer with `G = TRASH, ARTSY` being the possible guesses made to get the row. However, `A=THUMB` or `A=DRINK` could not be the answer as no valid guess would give `🟨🟩🟨⬛⬛` for those words. Thus we have been able to eliminate 2 possible answers just using this single row.

I just repeated the above process for all the unique rows eliminating the words which could not have been the answer to give that row for any guess to reduce the set of possible answers.

### Result
This simple elimination method from just ~90-160 rows of data works suprisingly well. Starting from a set of 12000 possible answers, each such row reduces the number of possible answers from the day until we get the following possible answer sets. Thorughout this process, we have no idea what the actual answer is or what guesses were actually made to get the row of emojis.
```
Wordle 210 Answer: panic Possible Answers: 1  panic
Wordle 211 Answer: solar Possible Answers: 1  solar
Wordle 212 Answer: shire Possible Answers: 1  shire
Wordle 213 Answer: proxy Possible Answers: 15 blate, cores, cruse, leads, plays, prays, proke, proxy, reams, reins, sanes, sears, snide, troat, wares
Wordle 214 Answer: point Possible Answers: 1  point
Wordle 215 Answer: robot Possible Answers: 1  robot
Wordle 216 Answer: prick Possible Answers: 1  prick
Wordle 217 Answer: wince Possible Answers: 1  wince
Wordle 218 Answer: crimp Possible Answers: 3  crimp, marle, pales
Wordle 219 Answer: knoll Possible Answers: 28 caron, cires, cores, coria, curet, derat, drees, galed, grees, knoll, loued, monie, pared, pelas, piney, pitas, potae, prees, serin, tared, tears, telia, terra, tines, toles, tones, topes, toran
Wordle 220 Answer: sugar Possible Answers: 1  sugar
Wordle 221 Answer: whack Possible Answers: 2  deals, whack
Wordle 222 Answer: mount Possible Answers: 1  mount
Wordle 223 Answer: perky Possible Answers: 1  perky
Wordle 224 Answer: could Possible Answers: 2  could, tears
Wordle 225 Answer: wrung Possible Answers: 15 aired, eared, galed, hared, niter, oared, paled, pared, paris, plats, plies, poled, waled, wares, wrung
Wordle 226 Answer: light Possible Answers: 5  bares, light, mites, rates, rites
Wordle 227 Answer: those Possible Answers: 1  those
Wordle 228 Answer: moist Possible Answers: 1  moist
Wordle 229 Answer: shard Possible Answers: 1  shard
Wordle 230 Answer: pleat Possible Answers: 1  pleat
Wordle 231 Answer: aloft Possible Answers: 1  aloft
Wordle 232 Answer: skill Possible Answers: 1  skill
Wordle 233 Answer: elder Possible Answers: 1  elder
Wordle 234 Answer: frame Possible Answers: 1  frame
Wordle 235 Answer: humor Possible Answers: 9  bones, hares, humor, mites, pales, palis, pares, pones, ratos
Wordle 236 Answer: pause Possible Answers: 1  pause
Wordle 237 Answer: ulcer Possible Answers: 1  ulcer
Wordle 238 Answer: ultra Possible Answers: 1  ultra
```

### More details

#### Clean Tweets
For this method, we are assuming that if we have a row in the data, it means someone made a valid guess with the row as the result. However, the data has noise with some of the tweets being jokes or emojis pixel art. Therefore, I remove any noisy rows from the set of unique rows before calculating the smallest answer set. These noisy rows include rows not of the length 5, rows which are some permutation of `🟨🟩🟩🟩🟩`, and rows for which there are no valid guesses for the actual answer for the day. I use the actual answer for the day only to identify noisy rows and not for the eliminations above.

#### Minimum chances to solve
While the intention of this is not to solve Wordle the quickest, we suprisingly get the only one possible answer 71% of the time. Even for the remaining ones, we have a relatively small set of possible answers. We check for these cases, how long it would take us to actually solve it. We randomly start from a word from the possible answers. It we chose the actual answer we of course get it in one guess. If its not the actual answer, we use the feedback from the game to further reduce the possible answer set to those which fit the row. Using this method, even in the worst case where we never chose the answer until it is the only possible answer left, we can solve Wordle in 3 guesses. For instance, using all possible words and all possible ways to reduce the set, we laways solve proxy in 3 tries.
```
['wares', 'proxy']
['troat', 'proke', 'proxy']
['troat', 'proxy']
['sears', 'proxy']
['sanes', 'proxy']
['reins', 'troat', 'proxy']
['reins', 'proxy']
['reams', 'proxy']
['proke', 'proxy']
['prays', 'proxy']
['plays', 'proxy']
['leads', 'proxy']
['cruse', 'troat', 'proxy']
['cruse', 'proxy']
['cores', 'troat', 'proxy']
['cores', 'proxy']
['blate', 'proxy']
['snide', 'troat', 'proxy']
['snide', 'proxy']
['proxy']
```  

#### All rows instead of present ones
For the ones that did not reduce the set to 1 in one go, I was interested if the Twitter rows actually covered all the possible rows and if not could we reduce the set further from the ones no one guessed. Checking the missing rows, it was clear that the guesses not made were really esoteric words and only a handful of such words would have satisfied the missing rows. For example:

The number of guesses no one in the data made were:

Using these addtional rows I can reduce the answer set to:

#### Filtering words
Throughtout this, the main operation we've performed is, given a set of words and a row of emojis, to eliminate the words which could have have been the answer to get that guess with any other word. To do this efficiently without precomputing and storing a large mapping, I generating a regex for each word and the row and checked if there was any word matching it in all words. For instance we are checking the word `A=GREAT` to be the possible answer and the row `🟨🟩🟨⬛⬛`. From this row, we can gather that the guess `G`: 1) must have R as the 2nd character. 2) `G`, `E`, `A`, `T` are not the 1st, 3rd, 4th and 5th characters respectively (If they were, they'd be green) 3) One of `E`, `A`, `T` is the 1st character 4) One of `G`, `A`, `T` is the 3rd character. Just using this we get the regex `[EAT][R][GAT][^A][^T]`. For the 🟨 positions, I have to use the union of the possible characters at two yellow positions `[EAT]` $\cup$ `[GAT]` = `[EATG]`. Of these 4 characters, two of them have to appear exactly twice and all other characters should be different. This gives me an overall regex of `^(?=[EAT][R][GAT][^A][^T])((?:[^ETGA]*(([ETGA])(?!.*\3))){2}[^ETGA]*)$` for `GREAT` and `🟨🟩🟨⬛⬛` row with which I compare all words and see if there are any words that match. Here, we match with words like `TRAIN`, `TRASH`, `ARTSY` which will give `🟨🟩🟨⬛⬛` so we check other rows assuming `A=GREAT`.

Wordle has specific rules for how it handles the 🟨 when there are repeated characters in the answer or the guess. This regex works correctly for non repeating characters, and I add more conditions for repeated characters but it does not capture all cases. While in practice it mostly affects obsure guesses and doesn't impact the overall method or results, it makes mistakes in missing out on certain words. To verify I also use a method of using a precomputed list of possible guesses for each answer to get completely accurate results.
